1. Configuration and Setup
Scenario: You are tasked with setting up Prometheus to monitor a new application. How would you configure it?

Expected Answer:
Describe how to configure the prometheus.yml file.
Add the application endpoint as a target.
Test scraping and ensure metrics are accessible.
Follow-up: What if the application runs behind a load balancer or reverse proxy?

Talk about using service discovery or scraping individual instances.


2. Debugging and Troubleshooting
Scenario: Prometheus is not scraping metrics from one of your targets. How would you troubleshoot?

Expected Answer:
Check the prometheus.yml configuration for syntax errors.
Verify that the target endpoint is reachable (using curl or telnet).
Inspect the Prometheus UI under /targets for error messages.
Check the application's metrics endpoint for proper output.
Follow-up: What would you do if Prometheus could scrape some targets but not others?

Suggest testing network/firewall rules or looking for misconfigured targets.


3. Alerts and Notifications
Scenario: You need to configure an alert for high CPU usage across multiple instances. How would you do it?

Expected Answer:
Write an alert rule in the alerts.yml file:
yaml
Copy code
- alert: HighCPUUsage
  expr: avg(rate(node_cpu_seconds_total{mode="idle"}[5m])) < 10
  for: 1m
  labels:
    severity: critical
  annotations:
    summary: "High CPU usage detected"
Reload Prometheus and test the rule.
Follow-up: How would you integrate alerts with a tool like Slack or PagerDuty?

Mention configuring Alertmanager and adding a webhook or API integration.


4. Performance and Scalability
Scenario: Prometheus is experiencing high memory usage. What could be the issue, and how would you address it?
Expected Answer:
Issues:
Large number of scraped targets.
Long retention periods.
High-resolution scraping intervals.
Solutions:
Reduce the scrape interval for less critical jobs.
Use Prometheus federation for scalability.
Optimize retention settings.


5. Monitoring Specific Applications
Scenario: How would you monitor a Java application using Prometheus?

Expected Answer:
Use Micrometer or Prometheus Java Client library to expose metrics.
Configure Prometheus to scrape the metrics endpoint.
Create specific alerts for Java metrics (e.g., JVM memory usage).
Follow-up: How would you handle a scenario where the application produces custom metrics?

Suggest creating custom Prometheus collectors in the application.


6. Incident and Root Cause Analysis
Scenario: An alert for high latency is triggered. How would you investigate the issue using Prometheus?

Expected Answer:
Query Prometheus for http_request_duration_seconds metrics.
Check related metrics like CPU, memory, and network traffic.
Correlate application logs with the time of high latency.
Follow-up: What if you notice no anomalies in infrastructure metrics?

Discuss potential application-level bottlenecks, database slowness, or external dependencies.



7. Integration with Other Tools
Scenario: How would you integrate Prometheus with Grafana?

Expected Answer:
Add Prometheus as a data source in Grafana.
Import or create custom dashboards using Prometheus queries (PromQL).
Follow-up: How would you create a Grafana alert based on Prometheus data?

Describe setting up a threshold condition and configuring the notification channel.


8. PromQL (Query Language) Scenarios
Scenario: Write a query to get the average memory usage across all instances over the last 5 minutes.

Expected Answer:
promql
Copy code
avg(rate(node_memory_MemTotal_bytes[5m]))
Follow-up: How would you filter the query for a specific instance?

Use a label selector:
promql
Copy code
avg(rate(node_memory_MemTotal_bytes{instance="instance1"}[5m]))


9. Real-World Problem Solving
Scenario: Your team reports that a dashboard is missing metrics for a specific service. How do you resolve it?
Expected Answer:
Check Prometheus targets for the service.
Verify the metrics endpoint is reachable and outputs correctly.
Confirm Grafana is querying the right Prometheus data source.
Ensure the dashboard's query is accurate.


10. Best Practices
Scenario: What best practices would you follow when setting up Prometheus in production?
Expected Answer:
Use service discovery for dynamic environments.
Optimize scrape intervals based on the criticality of services.
Use Prometheus federation for scaling large environments.
Secure Prometheus with authentication and HTTPS.
Regularly review and refine alert rules to reduce noise.




